a while back I made a video about Bayes
rule and explained how it had been
influential in my thinking I didn't
really however explain how Bayes rule
works or what it is so I'm gonna do that
today I'll start with a puzzle imagine
that you're walking across the campus of
some large American University and you
meet a guy let's call him Tom you chat
with Tom for a few minutes and you
notice that tom is shy he's not really
making eye contact very often he's some
mumbling and my question for you is if
you had to guess would you guess that
tom is more likely to be in a math ph.d
program or in the business school let's
assume it has to be one or the other so
I don't know what you guessed but I've
taught a class on Bayes rule a bunch of
time so I can tell you what most people
guess and that is that tom is more
likely to be a math PhD student the
reasoning is that shyness is just much
more common in math PhDs than in
business schools and I think this is
accurate based on my experience there's
an old joke that goes how can you tell
the extroverted mathematician and the
answer is he's the one looking at your
shoes instead of his shoes anyway so I
think that observation is accurate but
there's another piece of information
that's relevant and that people tend to
forget when answering this question and
that is how many math PhDs are there
relative to distance school students
there's a lot fewer the numbers will
vary from school to school but it's
something on the order of ten times as
many business school students as math
PhD students so we have these two pieces
of information about there being many
more business students than math
students and also about shyness being
more common among math students than
business students and the question is
how do we combine these two pieces to
get one overall estimate about Tom this
is where Bayes rule comes in so you can
imagine that this divided rectangle
represents the relative proportions of
math to business students very roughly
speaking we'll put it at one to ten and
now looking just at math students we can
ask how common is shyness
I would very roughly guess that it's
about 75% of math PhD students come off
as shy and now looking just at business
school students again guessing roughly
I'd say about 15% of business school
students come off as shy so now we've
represented both of those pieces of
information in one diagram and we want
to know whether tom is more likely to be
in a math program or a business program
we don't know which one he's in but we
do know that he's shy which means that
he must be in one of those lavender
rectangles right because those represent
the shy math and the shy business
students so to get a sense of the
relative probabilities of him being in
math versus business we just have to
compare the relative sizes of those
lavender rectangles and it looks roughly
like the lavender business rectangle is
about twice as big as the lavender math
rectangle and you can see how the math
shakes out we just multiplied two linear
ratios the ratio of math to business
students which we put at one to ten
times the ratio of shyness in math
versus shyness in business which we put
it 75 215 and multiplying those two
linear ratios gives us a ratio of areas
which comes out to about one to two so
roughly twice as likely for Tom to be in
the business program even though shyness
is more common among math students so
this is the mechanics of Bayes rules how
it works and now I want to talk about
how I use it in my everyday thinking I
don't plug numbers into a formula I
almost never draw these diagrams in fact
but there are a few rules principles of
thinking that fall out of the math of
Bayes rule that that are really useful
for me principle number one is something
like remember your priors so as you saw
in the Tom example what people naturally
do is focus on the evidence that tom is
shy and forget about the prior the sort
of background knowledge that math is
just a much less common major or program
than business and this is a very common
phenomenon it's called base rate neglect
and a personal example I have many
examples of this myself but one example
comes recently from I
I rented a house with some friends and
while we were there we had to call a
repairman to fix the stove and he made
us a little bit nervous
because while he was there we noticed
him sort of peering into different rooms
of the house and there's no reason you
would need to see the bedroom of a house
if you're here to fix the stove so we
had heard stories in which repairmen
come back after having done their
repairs and robbed a house after having
had a chance to you know case the joint
or whatever and so we were worried that
that was what was going on in this case
and I think that seeing the repairman's
snooping is some evidence that should
make you somewhat more confident that
he's going to rob you but we had to take
a step back and remember what is the
prior on a repairman being honest versus
a robber and I think that it's not that
common for someone to be a robber I
don't know the exact numbers but maybe
there are a hundred times more honest
repairmen than robbers something on that
order so even imagining that snooping is
much more common among robbers than
honest repair men let's say 80% of
robbers will be seen to be snooping and
maybe 10% of honest repair men even so
seeing that evidence should only bump
our probability of this guy wanting to
rob us from maybe 1% to maybe 8 percent
so you know we should lock our doors but
not freak out something like that so
that's principle number one remember
your priors principle number two I'll
illustrate with a another story from my
life a while ago I was working with a
guy named let's call him Bob and I had
reason to believe that Bob might be
jealous of or competitive with another
person who worked with us let's call her
Alice so one day I'm having coffee with
Bob and he's complaining about Alice I
think because she hadn't finished some
projects that she was supposed to have
finished by that point and I'm thinking
to myself this just proves that I was
right about Bob if he was jealous of
he would want to make her look bad and
he's complaining about her so I'm right
and a little while later it occurred to
me to ask well okay let's assume for the
moment that I'm wrong and Bob is not
jealous of Alice how implausible is it
really in that scenario that he would be
complaining about her and it's not
unplanned plausible at all actually
it often happens that people get annoyed
when someone doesn't finish something
that they were supposed to finish and it
doesn't have anything to do with being
jealous are competitive and so I may
still have my prior reasons to suspect
that Bob is probably jealous of or
competitive with Alice but seeing this
new piece of evidence should not make me
feel significantly more confident that
I'm right
maybe complaining about Alice is a
little bit more likely in the world in
which he's jealous of her than in the
world in which he's not but only
slightly it should not really shift my
probability that much at all
that I was right and I think that this
is a very common thing as well that we
go around the world seeing pieces of
evidence that we can explain with our
current theory with our pet theory and
that makes us feel all the more
confident that were right and we don't
take that extra step of asking well what
if I were wrong what would I expect to
see then and how different is it if at
all from what I see now so I keep this
principle in mind when let's say I try
some new diet and I notice that I have
more energy this week well how likely is
that in the world in which the diet
doesn't work compared to the world which
it does
maybe my energy is really very variable
so it's not really that implausible that
my energy would happen to be higher
right after trying the diet or let's say
I give someone a paper or an idea to
evaluate and he thinks it's great I have
to ask myself well how common is it for
him to think that bad ideas are great
how much evidence is his approval that
my idea is in fact great
so that's principle number two ask
yourself what if I were wrong what would
I expect to see and how is it different
from what I currently see pencil number
three is sort of the flipside of
principle number two you could you could
call
would update incrementally so another
story when I first moved to Berkeley I
was pretty confident that meditation was
for lack of a better word fake and so I
was surprised when I when one of my
friends that I met in Berkeley who's
very smart and thoughtful he raved about
meditation and said it had made him much
happier as a person and I think it's
very easy to explain this evidence away
by saying well there's a placebo effect
there he expected meditation to work and
so he felt that it did or maybe there
was something else in his life that
changed around the time he started
meditating and that was actually making
him happier
not the meditation and I think both of
these stories are totally plausible but
I have to admit that it seems at least a
little bit more likely that my smart
thoughtful friend would report benefits
from meditation in the world in which
meditation is real than in the world in
which it's not and so maybe I shouldn't
change my mind significantly about
whether meditation works or not but it
should it should update my probability a
little bit towards meditation being real
and if I encounter additional pieces of
small-to-medium-sized evidence as time
goes on all of which are more likely in
the world in which meditation works than
the world in which it doesn't
I should gradually you know change my
mind maybe there will be a tipping point
where cumulatively it's just more likely
overall that meditation works than that
it doesn't given all the evidence I've
encountered and I think it's important
to pay attention to these these
snowflakes of evidence that maybe weigh
very little on their own but if you pay
attention to them and notice how they
accumulate gradually their their
collective weight becomes enough to
break a tree branch
so that's principle number three update
incrementally and I hope that you've
gotten some sense now for Bayes rule how
it works the intuition behind it and and
how it can be useful and informing your
thinking I don't think that it's the
be-all end-all of how to think about
everything as some people hold it up to
be but I do think it's a really
essential framework for thinking about
what
believe how confident to be and how to
shift your beliefs as you encounter new
information about the world
you